Hello, everyone.
In this video we're going to configure code light to work with the C plus plus compiler on Ubuntu Linux.
I'm running Ubuntu 22.04, which is jemmy.
I've already opened code light.
The first time you run code light you're going to get a setup wizard pop up window that pops up just
like this.
If you don't get that, you can always go to help and run it from there.
We do want to run this setup wizard, so I want to click next.
I'm going to click See plus Plus development and click next again.
And I'm going to ask Code light to scan my system to find compilers.
I'll click that button and you can see it found GCC 11, which was the compiler that we installed.
Now I'm going to rename that to just GCC.
That way it's consistent throughout the course, but I'll do that in just a moment.
I'll select next.
Here you can choose the color whether you want a dark theme or a light theme.
I generally use a dark theme, but I think the light theme shows up better on video.
So I'm just going to leave this alone and I'll select next.
And on this screen, just click finish.
Okay, so code will close down and open back up.
And now what we want to do is we want to set up the compiler and we're just going to change the name.
So I'm going to come up to settings and go to build settings.
And there you can see GCC right here.
So I'm just going to right click and rename and I'm just going to call it GCC.
Just like that, and I'll hit.
Okay?
Perfect.
Now what we want to do is we want to create workspaces.
The way code light works is it's got workspaces.
And in those workspaces, you can have many projects, each project being a C plus plus program.
So it's a real nice way to organize your work.
The first thing we want to do is we want to create a new workspace.
Now, there's a lot of ways to do that.
I can click this big button right here, right in front of me.
I can also come up to Workspace new Workspace, and I can go to file new workspace over here.
A lot of different ways to do it.
I'm going to just click this button right here.
Now I'm going to select the C plus plus workspace and click okay.
Now it's going to ask me, where do you want to store your workspaces?
You've got some choices here.
You can put them on your desktop.
You can put them in your documents folder.
I'm going to put it right off of my home directory right there, and I'm going to create a folder there.
Let me click over here to create the folder and I'm going to call it workspaces so I can create as many
workspaces as I want in here.
And then projects within each of those workspaces.
And I can have everything nicely organized.
So I'm going to click Create, and I'll hit open.
So now you can see that the workspace path is my home directory, followed by workspaces and the workspace
name is going to be workspace one or whatever you like, what you're working on pointers, maybe you
want a pointers workspace and so forth.
Make sure that the create the workspace under a separate directory is checked and I'm going to click
okay And that will create my workspace.
And you can see it right over here on the Workspace view.
You can see the workspace one.
Now what we want to do is create projects within that workspace so I can right click on the workspace
one and create a new project.
Or I can come up to file new project.
Again, a lot of different ways to do it.
I'm just going to right click here and say new project.
And now we get this new project wizard.
We know that the path is that workspace one folder.
That's where my workspace is now.
It's asking us for the project name.
I'm just going to call it Project One.
Just like that.
Very important.
I'm going to probably say this more times than you want to hear it, but it's very important.
No spaces, no special characters, no international characters anywhere.
So don't start putting plus symbols and dots and slashes and dollar signs in these names because that
will usually mess up the builds later.
So just keep them really, really simple.
Make sure that the create the project in its own folder is checked.
Now the category we're going to select is console because we're going to be creating console based applications.
The type is going to be simple executable, G plus plus right here.
The compiler is GCC.
That's the one we just installed and renamed.
The debugger is the GNU gdb debugger.
We only have one option here.
And the build system.
We've got two options.
We're going to select code light, make file generator.
I'm installing version 17.3 of code light.
Previous versions had a default build system.
It was called default and it worked great.
But in this version and going forward, the code light developer removed that default build system.
I don't know why I did that, but we have to deal with it.
So we'll make a few adjustments to the way we create new projects.
But it's pretty easy once we have all that, make sure all this is correct, you click okay and you
can see now that we've got a new project over here, Project One, and it's got a source folder and
it's got my main.cpp file in it.
The Main.cpp file is our source code.
Now I'm going to make this a little bit bigger, so I'm going to go to settings, colors and fonts,
and I'm just going to create maybe a let's see.
We can set that to 20.
That should be nice and big.
So it shows up good on video and I'll select that and apply and then hit.
Okay.
All right.
So now the font is nice and large.
So first thing we're going to do is we're going to delete this.
I'm just going to copy it all and just press delete.
Okay.
Now you can see over here you have this black dot that's telling you that this file has been changed.
So what's on disk is different from what you're seeing.
Makes sense because we just deleted a bunch of stuff.
So we want to be sure that whenever we see that, we save when we're done.
So first thing we're going to do is we're going to type in a real simple Hello world.
C plus plus program.
The reason we do this is because it's simple.
And if it runs and we see Hello World, we know that our development environment is set up correctly.
So that's the reason for doing it at this point.
Just type along, follow along all the C plus plus will be explained later.
The point of this video is to make sure that our development environment is set up correctly.
So I'm going to type pound, include add space, left angle bracket I o stream and right angle bracket.
Then I'm going to type using namespace std semicolon.
There's spaces between using and the namespace and namespace and standard.
Now I want to write my main function.
Every C plus plus program has a main function and that's where execution begins.
So let's do that.
We'll type int, int space, main left, parentheses right per end.
And then we have an open curly brace and you'll notice that code light automatically closed the right
curly brace for me.
So that way they match.
Make sure you spell main correctly, Make sure those are parentheses.
Make sure you've got spaces where I have spaces and so forth.
Okay, so now I'm just going to tab over and I'm going to type C out to left angle brackets side by
side, no space between them and hello world.
And I want that within double quotes to left angle brackets again.
And then the word e n d l for end line.
Make sure that's e n d l and not END1.
The l and the one look really similar.
Then I'm going to return space zero and a semicolon.
That's it.
That's our simple main.
When we run it, we should see Hello World display on the terminal.
But before we run it, we need to configure this project and give it a few compiler settings.
First thing though, is let's save this so you can come up here to file save file, or you can press
control S.
I'm going to press control.
S and you can see that black dot is gone.
It might be a red dot on your system.
It was a red dot in my other system, but it's a black dot here.
In any case, you're going to see that dot there when the file is dirty.
In other words, when it hasn't been saved, when I've made some changes, but I haven't saved them
to disk yet.
Okay, so now let's set up the project.
I'm going to right click on the project and select settings.
You can also just click on the project and select this wrench Right up here does the same thing At this
point.
My project Settings window opens and let's go through this.
The project type is executable.
The Makefile generator is code light, Makefile generator.
The compiler is GCC, the intermediate directory is blank.
The output file says project name and sometimes you need to stretch this out just a little bit to see
more stuff.
And I think that doesn't happen on the on Windows or Mac, but it does happen on Linux sometimes.
Let me stretch that out a little bit.
So all of this is the stuff that we put in earlier.
There's one thing that's really important is this one right here, the working directory.
We want to delete that the entire line and we want to replace it with dollar left parentheses project
path right parentheses where the P in project and the P in path are uppercase.
That's really important.
Okay.
That's the first part.
The second part is I'm going to come over here to my compiler, click compiler, and right up here where
it says Cplusplus compiler.
I'm going to click that line and you can see these little button shows up with three dots in it.
I'm going to click that.
Then I'm going to come over here and the compiler options and I want to choose enable C plus plus 17
features.
This one right here enable C plus plus 17 features stood equals C plus plus 17 that will tell code light
to use the C plus plus version of the compiler.
That's it, We're done.
We'll click okay, we'll click apply and we'll click okay one more time.
At this point, we are good to go.
Now I'm going to make this full screen here so that we have a little bit more room to see what's happening.
Now.
We're ready to build our project.
The way that code light works, since it can have multiple projects in this workspace here, of course,
we only have one right now.
We'll create another one in just a moment.
It builds and runs the active project and you can see the active project right there.
It's bold and it's italicized.
So if I have a bunch of projects, there's only going to be one that's bold and italicized, and that's
considered the active project to make a project.
The active project, you can select it right click on it, and then come down here to make active,
or you could just double click on it.
Simple as that.
Now we're ready to build this, so we're going to come up to build and I'm going to select Rebuild Project,
and I'll talk about all of the differences here in a future video, I'm going to select Rebuild Project,
and the output window shows up down at the bottom.
I stretch this out.
It's a little bit bigger and you can see right here we're using the C plus plus compiler.
We're building Project one Main.cpp We've got stood C plus plus 17 and all the stuff that we typed in.
So this is great.
We have a successful build, no errors, no warnings.
Now I can run my program.
So let me close this up again to give us a little bit more room down there.
And I'm going to go to build and I'm going to select Run.
Do I want to build and execute or just execute?
I've already built it, so I'm just going to execute it and we get a terminal window pop up and it says,
Hello world hit any key to continue the Hello World is our program to hit any key to continue is what
code light puts in there because otherwise it would just display that and close up the window real fast.
So we press any key to continue.
It closes the window and we are done.
So that's it.
Simple as that.
That's the way we organize this.
In a couple of videos from now I'm going to have a video that shows you how to create a project template
so that we don't have to do the stood equals C plus plus 17 part, which saves us a little bit of time.
Great.
So let's create another project.
And the second project is going to be basically the same source code.
Again, close this down down here.
So I'm just going to copy this source code.
I'm going to press control C to copy and I'm going to go to my workspace and I'm going to select right
click.
New project.
I get the same new project Wizard and I'm going to create Project two.
In this case, again, no spaces, no special characters, no international characters.
Make sure that create the project in its own folder is selected.
These settings should carry over from the last time we did this.
So we've got console simple executable g plus plus gcc the gdb debugger and code light makefile generator.
We'll click okay.
And now over here you can see we have project two and it's got a source folder and it's got a main.cpp.
Let me expand these so you can see that they are two distinct projects.
Now if you look up here, you know that this is the source code for Project One.
You can see that right up here in the tab.
And if I double click on this main.cpp, it will open up next to it and that's Project two.
So this is Project One's main, this is Project Two's main, so I'm just going to grab all that and
paste the other one that I copied into it and I'm going to say Hello World from Project two.
Notice the black dot up here, so I'm going to hit Ctrl s to save.
Now I know that I've saved this.
Now we're going to do the same thing.
We're going to set up Project two, so I'm going to click on Project two, click on the Wrench.
And right here, you can always see up here it says Project two settings.
And this really stretched out that time.
There we go.
Let's try that.
So again, General, we're going to come right here to working directory.
I'm going to delete that and I'm going to type dollar project path inside parentheses with the two PS
uppercase.
That's it.
Then I'm going to go to my compiler.
Go to my C plus plus compiler options.
Click that button with the three dots.
Select Enable C plus plus 17 features stood equals C plus plus 17.
Click.
Okay.
Apply.
Click.
Okay.
Now we're ready to build, but we have to wait a second.
We can't just build now because if we build, the active project will be built and that's project one.
You can see here, I don't want to build Project one, I want to build Project two.
So what I can do is I can right click on Project two and make it active, or I could just double click
on it.
And when I double click on it, you can see that it's now the active project.
It's bold and italicized so I can come back up to build.
I can select Rebuild Project.
We have our build output down here and you can see that Project two has been built right here.
We've got all the options we want, so this is a good thing.
I'll close this up and now we're ready to run.
So I'm going to go build and run.
I'm just going to execute.
And now we should say Hello World from Project two, which is exactly what we see.
We can press any key.
I'm just going to press enter to close this down.
So that's it.
We've got our build environment working now.
We can start writing code.
The other thing that I'd like you to do is go up to settings.
And preferences.
And come all the way over here on the right to miscellaneous and just click that.
And in start up right here, there is a check for new version on startup and I want you to uncheck that.
Otherwise it's going to ask you to upgrade to a new version.
Every time there's a new version or a point release.
My advice is to resist the urge to update.
If you've got a working environment that's working and you're able to use it to develop programs, don't
mess around with it.
Just use the same development environment throughout the course.
Sometimes we think that the upgrades are better.
A lot of times upgrades are bleeding edge and they're full of bugs and they're not really worth the
trouble.
So once we've got a working development environment, leave it alone.
It works great.
I'm going to apply.
Click okay and that's it.
We're ready to go.
Our build environment is set up.
One more thing.
When I build, it's possible that we have errors, right?
Of course we can have typos, we can have syntax errors.
So for example, suppose I forgot that semicolon right there I can come up to first I want to save.
And there's the little red arrow there that's telling me there's a problem.
There's expecting a semicolon after namespace.
That's not the compiler.
That's the code Lights IntelliSense, if you will, which is kind of going through our code and looking
at it and trying to help us out.
But if we build, you can see that we have a syntax error.
It says expecting a semicolon before the int and we have an error and our program did not build correctly.
So we don't want to run this program until we fix the error.
There are a lot of errors that we can get and we'll do a whole video on just the kinds of errors that
you'll see common errors.
This is one that's really common is forgetting the semicolon at the end.
A lot of students spell iostream wrong and they put iostream.
So that's a problem.
If we misspell main, you can imagine if we put spaces between these two angle brackets, if we forget
one of these parentheses.
So there's a lot of places the syntax has to be just right.
But again, we'll talk about all of this in the course.
At this point, you're good to go.
If you have any questions or any issues, please post them in the forum.
Look on the forums because just about every question has already been asked and answered.
But if you have a question that's not out there, please post it and I'll be happy to help you.
The next video you should go to in this section is the video that shows how to create a default project
template.
So I'll see you there.